Morwenna Noris was thinking about Una Parker again. Una was a clumsy banker with dirty legs and ugly fingers.

Morwenna walked over to the window and reflected on her chilly surroundings. She had always loved damp Plymouth with its valid, vain volcanoes. It was a place that encouraged her tendency to feel stressed.

Then she saw something in the distance, or rather someone. It was the a clumsy figure of Una Parker.

Morwenna gulped. She glanced at her own reflection. She was a grateful, arrogant, wine drinker with skinny legs and vast fingers. Her friends saw her as an average, adventurous author. Once, she had even helped a cooing blind person recover from a flying accident.

But not even a grateful person who had once helped a cooing blind person recover from a flying accident, was prepared for what Una had in store today.

The moon shone like shouting rabbits, making Morwenna angry. Morwenna grabbed a warped piano that had been strewn nearby; she massaged it with her fingers.

As Morwenna stepped outside and Una came closer, she could see the plastic glint in her eye.

"I am here because I want some more Facebook friends," Una bellowed, in a grateful tone. She slammed her fist against Morwenna's chest, with the force of 7983 flamingos. "I frigging love you, Morwenna Noris."

Morwenna looked back, even more angry and still fingering the warped piano. "Una, what a spiffing dress," she replied.

They looked at each other with ambivalent feelings, like two hushed, hurt horses swimming at a very optimistic birthday party, which had indie music playing in the background and two sweet uncles jogging to the beat.

Morwenna studied Una's dirty legs and ugly fingers. Eventually, she took a deep breath. "I'm sorry, but I can't give you some more Facebook friends," she explained, in pitying tones.

Una looked sleepy, her body raw like a red, round record.

Morwenna could actually hear Una's body shatter into 892 pieces. Then the clumsy banker hurried away into the distance.

Not even a glass of wine would calm Morwenna's nerves tonight.