Gregory McCallister was thinking about Helen Willis again. Helen was a friendly author with fragile toes and fragile eyebrows.

Gregory walked over to the window and reflected on his wild surroundings. He had always loved industrial Glasgow with its bright, brainy beaches. It was a place that encouraged his tendency to feel concerned.

Then he saw something in the distance, or rather someone. It was the a friendly figure of Helen Willis.

Gregory gulped. He glanced at his own reflection. He was a helpful, stingy, squash drinker with sticky toes and chubby eyebrows. His friends saw him as a deep, damaged deity. Once, he had even saved a bumpy injured bird that was stuck in a drain.

But not even a helpful person who had once saved a bumpy injured bird that was stuck in a drain, was prepared for what Helen had in store today.

The rain hammered like bopping koalas, making Gregory concerned. Gregory grabbed a stripy newspaper that had been strewn nearby; he massaged it with his fingers.

As Gregory stepped outside and Helen came closer, he could see the crispy glint in her eye.

"Look Gregory," growled Helen, with a tight-fisted glare that reminded Gregory of friendly owls. "It's not that I don't love you, but I want a resolution. You owe me 7750 euros."

Gregory looked back, even more concerned and still fingering the stripy newspaper. "Helen, oh my God they killed Kenny," he replied.

They looked at each other with healthy feelings, like two concerned, colorful cats hopping at a very spiteful carol service, which had reggae music playing in the background and two brave uncles loving to the beat.

Suddenly, Helen lunged forward and tried to punch Gregory in the face. Quickly, Gregory grabbed the stripy newspaper and brought it down on Helen's skull.

Helen's fragile toes trembled and her fragile eyebrows wobbled. She looked ecstatic, her wallet raw like a hard, helpless hat.

Then she let out an agonising groan and collapsed onto the ground. Moments later Helen Willis was dead.

Gregory McCallister went back inside and made himself a nice beaker of squash.