Analysts once predicted that books would overtake print by 2015. After all, they’re lighter to pack on a trip; they don’t clutter shelves; they don’t weigh down backpacks. Yet, book sales have slipped lately, and there are signs that even book adopters are returning to print.

Are paper books just better than books?

In “The Plot Twist: book Sales Slip, and Print Is Far From Dead,” Alexandra Alter writes:

    Five years ago, the book world was seized by collective panic over the uncertain future of print.

    As readers migrated to new digital devices, book sales soared, up 1,260 percent between 2008 and 2010, alarming booksellers that watched consumers use their stores to find titles they would later buy online. Print sales dwindled, bookstores struggled to stay open, and publishers and authors feared that cheaper books would cannibalize their business.

    Then in 2011, the industry’s fears were realized when Borders declared bankruptcy.

    “books were this rocket ship going straight up,” said Len Vlahos, a former executive director of the Book Industry Study Group, a nonprofit research group that tracks the publishing industry. “Just about everybody you talked to thought we were going the way of digital music.”

    But the digital apocalypse never arrived, or at least not on schedule. While analysts once predicted that books would overtake print by 2015, digital sales have instead slowed sharply.

    Now, there are signs that some book adopters are returning to print, or becoming hybrid readers, who juggle devices and paper. book sales fell by 10 percent in the first five months of this year, according to the Association of American Publishers, which collects data from nearly 1,200 publishers. Digital books accounted last year for around 20 percent of the market, roughly the same as they did a few years ago.

    books’ declining popularity may signal that publishing, while not immune to technological upheaval, will weather the tidal wave of digital technology better than other forms of media, like music and television.

Students: Read the entire article, then tell us …

— Are paper books better than books?

— Do they offer a richer, more satisfying reading experience because you can physically hold them and turn the pages?

— Are they better because they are free from technical problems, like low battery power and glitches?

— Do print books carry more emotional or sentimental value because you can touch them and see them on the shelf?

— Or is the story not over yet — and books will still take the place of paper books in the long run? 