Many growers around the world are having to abandon their farms or turn to illicit crops such as coca. This, in turn, is casting doubt over the future sustainability of supplies — and could, ultimately, prove costly for consumers.
Why are growers struggling at a time when the price of a cup of coffee seems to be rising?

Consumers might assume that at least part of any price increase for their morning cup of coffee is passed on to the farmer. But in an everyday £2.50 brew, the coffee itself accounts for just 4 per cent of the cost, or about 10p, while rent, labour and tax make up three-quarters of the overall price, according to consultancy firm Allegra Strategies.

The long coffee value chain means that just a fraction of the 10p spent on coffee grounds ends up with the farmer.
A graphic with no description
What does the value chain look like?

A lot happens after the coffee berries are picked from the tree.

Processors wash the berries to remove the raw beans from the fruit, dry them and prepare them for export. Bagged, green beans are then passed through middlemen — importers, traders and exporters — to eventually end up in the hands of roasters.

Using a 2012 test case cited by the International Trade Centre’s Coffee Exporter’s Guide as a benchmark, roasters end up taking almost 80 per cent of the wholesale coffee price. The grower takes a little more than 10 per cent, the equivalent of just 1p from a £2.50 cup of coffee.

Over the years, the margin made by middlemen, such as traders and logistics companies, has been squeezed further. “Since I started 30 years ago, the prices we charge have been pushed down and down, and margins are getting tighter and tighter,” said Raf Roggerman, a commercial manager at Pacorini, a logistics group for commodities.
Who makes the biggest margin in the coffee value chain and why?

While cafés and retailers end up taking most of the margin on a cup of coffee, of the wholesale value of coffee the roasters are the leading beneficiaries.

Experts argue that not only does roasting turn green coffee beans into something that is drinkable, roasters spend time and money finding and blending the coffees that fit the flavour demands of their customers.

“There is a major research and development cost to understand the flavour preferences of different consumers,” said Dan Webber, founder of speciality roaster Chimney Fire Coffee.

Roasters also carry much of the risk, often being left out of pocket because they only recover the cost of the beans when it is ready for sale.
Who are the big roasters?

Nestlé and large retailers such as Starbucks have been taking advantage of the margins in roasting for some time, but smaller café chains are now starting to do the same.

“At one point, roasters were the ones hoping to own a coffee shop, but now the reverse is happening; practically every café with more than one shop is interested in starting to roast themselves,” said Mr Webber.

With the popularity in coffee continuing to grow, money is still flowing into the sector. “Coffee has been booming over the past 10 years. Often it seems like a bubble, but even smart money is investing and takeovers are still happening,” said Mr Banwell.

Consolidation has followed the coffee craze, with larger players acquiring smaller roasters and retail chains. The world’s top 10 roasters — led by Nestlé, JAB (an investment company owned by Germany’s Reimann family, which has been building up a global coffee empire), and Lavazza — handle about 35 per cent of the world’s coffee, according to the Coffee Barometer Report by a group of sustainability non-government organisations.

The costs affecting the price of a cup of coffee vary significantly by country.

“Whilst coffee is a tradable commodity, a latte in a coffee shop is not,” said Michael Schaefer, global lead of food and beverages at Euromonitor International. “Most of what you’re paying for in any market is the space you’re in and the expertise of the staff making the product, along with the value of the brand relative to other products.”

For example, a tall Starbucks latte in Russia is four times more expensive than the same drink ordered in the US when considered in relation to the costs of other goods. In some markets, where Starbucks is still positioned as a luxury brand, it is found in high-rent areas of the largest cities. The customer base tends to be well off relative to average incomes, and people are willing to spend more on the brands they like.

Elsewhere, staff pay can be a significant part of costs, and in other markets, currency effects matter — a strong local currency can make a latte look quite expensive when viewed in dollar terms.
