
AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF ADVANCED NURSING Volume 35 Issue 231SCHOLARLY PAPERIs it   time to re-ex   amine the doctor-nurse relationship since the introduction of the independent nurse prescriber?AUTHORMichael John PritchardEN(G), RGN, DipHE, BA (Hons), Msc, Independent Nurse PrescriberWirral University Teaching Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Clatterbridge Hospital, Clatterbridge Road, Bebington, CH 63 4 JY, United Kingdommichaelpritchard737@gmail.comKEY WORDSNon‑medical prescribing, power, professional relationshipABSTRACTObjectiveThe aim of this paper is to stimulate a debate and discussion into how the nurse‑doctor relationship needs to change. SettingThe National Health Service, United Kingdom.Primary argumentThe nurse‑doctor relationship needs to be re‑evaluated in light of the expanding role of nurse`s into areas that traditionally had been considered a doctor`s role. While the medical profession has been willing to relinquish some control to nurses in areas such as wound or incontinence care because these aspects do not threaten their authority, position or power. The issue of non‑medical prescribing remains for some in the medical profession a topic of concern. Despite non‑medical prescribing being discussed widely in the literature very little has been mentioned about how the introduction of the nurse prescriber has impacted the professional relationship between the nurse and the doctor.ConclusionThe blurring of the roles between nurses and doctors requires a re‑evaluation of this relationship. As nurses take on more responsibility such as prescribing medication the old traditional view of this relationship is no‑longer viable, if we are to maximise patient health care in the 21st century.
AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF ADVANCED NURSING Volume 35 Issue 232SCHOLARLY PAPERINTRODUCTIONIn  order  to  explore  the  relationship  it’s  important  to  understand  the  context  of  how  this  relationship  has  changed.  The  Introduction  of  nurse  prescribing  has  had  a  profound  effect  on  how  a  patient  can  obtain  a  prescription (Courtenay et  al  2011; Jones et  al  2011; Watterson et  al  2009). This    has    resulted one    might say   in the inevitable blurring of the professional boundaries between the medical and nursing professions (Kroezen et   al  2014; Kroezen et   al  2013; Natan et   al  2013; Bowskill et   al  2012). What made doctors unique from  other health professionals was the authority to prescribe medication and as a result the medical profession opposed granting prescribing rights to non‑medical professionals. They had used similar tactics during the introduction of the National Health Service (NHS) to maintain a position of privilege and power. However by the 1990`s the political as   well    as   medical landscape had changed. Politically the UK   government faced numerouschallenges on the public purse, cutting funding to the NHS would be seen as a vote loser. However making the resources already available to the NHS more accessible was something the public could understand. While  secondly  acknowledging  that  health  care  had  become  more  technical  and  multifaceted  requiring  a  much more   co‑ordinated approach. As   a  result, according to  McCartney et   al  (1999), the UK   governmentshifted its   policy to  reflect these views. A  key   component of  this    new    policy was    to  extend prescribing rightsto nurses and then use these nurses to make up the shortfall in doctors within the NHS. The government pushed through these plans despite the objections of the medical profession as a step too far and an attack on their authority (BBC 2005; Day 2005; Horton 2002).The concept of the nurse prescriber is not unique to the UK but can be found worldwide from America, Australia, Europe and    New    Zealand. But    what     is  unique is  how    extensive these rights are in  the UK   compared to  other    countries. In the UK a nurse can prescribe medication via two mechanisms. The first is as a supplementaryprescriber (SP), under this method a tripartite agreement called a Clinical Management Plan (CMP) is drawn up  between  the  doctor,  the  supplementary  prescriber  (a  nurse  or  pharmacist)  and  the  patient.    This  plan  outlines  the  care  and  treatments  that  all  parties  agreed  to  with  regard  to  the  patients’  illness  and  under  what circumstances the SP could adjust or amend a patient’s prescription without necessarily seeking the doctors’ permission. It also outlined when the SP had to refer back to the doctor if the patient’s condition fell outside of the parameters agreed. Although the mechanism had many advantages (Carey et al 2014; Carey and Courtenay 2008; Morrison and Weston 2006; Hennell 2004), it allowed the SP to prescribe any drug as long as the drug or class of drug was mentioned in the CMP. Its main strength was that it worked well for patients with long standing health issues such     as   Diabetes, Asthma, Hypertension or   COPD under the care of  a  dedicated doctor (Bissell et  al 2008; Cooper et al 2008; Courtenay and Carey 2008; Courtenay et al 2007). However this mechanism had a number of weaknesses, it was cumbersome and time consuming because each patient needed to have a CMP before the SP could prescribe any drugs. If the patient presented with a new health problem not covered in the CMP the SP could not offer any treatment and would have to refer the patient back to the doctor. It was this    inflexibility that    eventually led   to  the UK   government to  introduce the independent non‑medical prescriberin 2006. The key advantage of the Nurse Independent Prescriber (NIP) over the SP was the ability to prescribe drugs without the need of   a  CMP    or   requiring medical approval first.    The success of   NIP    can    be measuredin terms of an improvement in the effectiveness of health care delivery, and being more responsive to the patients’ needs (Jones et al 2011, Oldknow et al 2010). As  a  result  of  the  success  of  NIP  the  medical  profession  has  shifted  its  argument  away  from  the  loss  of  medical authority. Instead they have moved to questioning non‑medical prescribing in terms of its safety, its comparability to medical prescribing and even whether it is really necessary (Funnell et al 2014; Carey et 
AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF ADVANCED NURSING Volume 35 Issue 233SCHOLARLY PAPERal  2009; Watterson et  al  2009; Bradley and    Nolan 2007; Ladd 2005; Latter et  al  2005; Fisher et  al  2003;Rodden 2001; Luker et  al  1998). While these questions are legitimate concerns, it’s   surprising that    the samearguments have not been used to highlight similar concerns about the prescribing habits of junior medical staff  compared  to  more  senior  medical  staff.  Which  raises  the  possibility  the  medical  profession  is  using  non‑medical prescribing concerns to  re‑impose its   medical domination. But    what has    not   been debated or discussed to any great depth is the effect of the introduction of non‑medical prescribing on the relationship between nurses and    doctors. However before we  can    discuss this    relationship we  first    need to  understandthe backgrounds of these two professions. THE ORIGINS OF MEDICAL POWERAny attempt to analyse how the medical profession became so dominant in health care, must as a starting point  understand  that  this  dominance  was  not  achieved  overnight.  It  was  in  fact  a  long  process.    Michel  Foucault one    of  the greatest philosophers and    social theorists of  the 20th    century identified that    the originsof  medical power began to  flourish from    the 17th    century onwards in  what     he   called the “Disciplines”. Thesedisciplines began to develop alongside the developing institutions such as schools, hospitals and military organisations.  The introduction of Disciplines not only standardised behaviour (Hardin 2001) but it was through this disciplinary power that one can meticulously control the body and use subtle coercions, to produce a docility‑utility (Foucault 1995). This    docility‑utility is  the means by   which a  person has    hold    over    others so that they    operate in  a  desired manner, with    the techniques and    efficiency that    the person determines (Foucault1995). This    power was    clearly identified in  the seminal work    of  Freidson (1970) who    argued that    the medicalprofession had achieved this position of dominance by successfully negotiating considerable state sanctioned autonomy and self‑regulation. In other words the medical profession over time began to slowly exert itself in  areas over    health and    medicine. This    control resulted firstly in  dictating who should enter the professionto eventually who could legally treat a sick person. This dominance resulted in occupations such as Nursing and Pharmacist to fall under medical control. However the very success with which the medical profession now controlled health care delivery, began to come under scrutiny from the government in the face of growing demands for improvements in health care delivery and    a  more   efficient use  of  resources. This    was    most clearly indicated by   the Wanless Review (WelshAssembly Government, 2003) that assumed that 20% of work undertaken by medical staff will eventually be carried out by nurses.  Some of these roles have been supported by the medical profession such as ‑ wound care specialists, incontinence nurses; and diabetic nurses because they work within a framework of protocols and formularies, developed and approved by the medical profession that restricts and places the nurse in a subordinate position to the medical profession still (Creedon et al 2015).  The government however was looking for a more radical solution to improve patients’ access to timely treatments. What was highlighted was that patients at times faced delays in treatment, because doctors were not available to prescribe medication the patient needed.  While experienced nurses who understood what was needed could not give that care. The government’s response was    to  propose expanding prescribing rights to  suitable qualified and    experiencednurses, a response not universally supported by the medical profession.   ORIGINS OF THE NON-MEDICAL PRESCRIBERThe attraction for the government of the introduction of the nurse prescribers’ role was to make the NHS more responsive to the needs of the patient (NHS Plan 2000). However to implement this plan would require the government to undertake a complex legislative program of drafting new legislation and amending current legislation governing prescribing authority. The government also faced strong opposition from the medical 
AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF ADVANCED NURSING Volume 35 Issue 234SCHOLARLY PAPERprofession to the development of the non‑medical prescriber (Keighley 2006; Avery and Pringle 2005; Horton 2002). The medical profession viewed the introduction of the nurse prescribers’ role, as a direct challenge to  both    their    authority and    power (Elsom et  al  2009; Waring 2007; Avery and    Pringle 2005; Day    2005). This opposition to nurse prescribers should not be considered as unique to the United Kingdom; similar arguments were put forward in Australia (AMA 2005), New Zealand (Mackay 2003) and America (Hales 2002; Sharp 2000). The medical profession opposition to nurse prescribing in the UK however failed to appreciate that it was not solely about improving patient’s access to timely health care. The UK government was in fact seeking ways to  improve the efficiency of  the NHS, in  the face  of  an   aging population with    multiple complex healthcare needs that require multiple agency co‑operation. It was an acknowledgement by the UK government that the medical profession could no‑longer be the sole provider of health care. The solution to this problem according to the UK government was the nursing workforce. Nursing had become a graduate‑entry profession and    many nurses have    undertaken a  Master’s degree giving them specialist qualifications. Coupled with    the increasing technical skills required to perform many nursing tasks, expanding prescribing rights to suitably qualified and experienced nurses seemed a most logical solution to the UK government.Having  lost  the  argument  the  medical  profession  has  seen  an  extensive  legislative  program  put  forward  by  the  UK  government.  This  initially  gave  prescribing  rights  to  just  nurses  and  pharmacists,  but  with  this  success it eventually saw it expand to include chiropodists/ podiatrists, physiotherapists, optometrists and radiographers. The nurse prescriber is now a vital part of delivering health care to‑day. As the number of Nurse Prescriber`s have    increased 43,000 in  2006 to  72,000 in  2015 (Merrifield 2015) many institutionssuch as hospitals, walk‑in centres and GP practices routinely have nurse prescribers present. Despite the opposition of the medical profession to the concept of nurse prescribing, none of their dire predictions, such as patients coming to harm due to a non‑medical prescriber over prescribing medication or inappropriate prescribing, have occurred. What has yet to be determined is how the introduction of the Nurse Prescriber has affected the professional relationship between the two health professionals. DISCUSSION“A nurse must begin her work with the idea firmly implanted in her mind that she is only the instrument by whom the doctor gets his instructions carried out: she occupies no independent position in the treatment of the sick person” McGregor-Robertson (1902). This statement, despite being over 115 years ago, demonstrates quite clearly the dominant position the medical profession had procured for its self with regard to health care delivery. Echoes of this dominance can still be found in the medical professions continued opposition to non‑medical prescribing. However in the 115 years since this statement health care has undergone a dramatic change in terms of treatments and technology, but so too has societies views on gender stereotyping.  Health care does not live in a vacuum and as society began to change so did health care, women were no‑longer held back to being just nurses they were now physicians and    surgeons. As   a  result from    the late   1960`s through the 1970`s marked an   important turningpoint in  the field    of  social science research. This    research was    not   solely related to  society, health care also came under investigation. The work    of  Stein (1967) looked at  the professional relationship between nursesand    doctors in   his   article called “The doctor‑nurse game”. This    article explored this    relationship, startingfrom     the superficial stereotypical idea    dramatised in  numerous novels and    television series, to  the gamemodel, that demands participation. The attitudes created cause serious obstacles in the path of meaningful communication between physicians and nonmedical professional groups.  This idea of the nurse‑doctor relationship has been further developed by numerous authors such as Freidson (1970), Abbott (1988) and Adamson et al (1995) who suggested that the relationship between the medical
AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF ADVANCED NURSING Volume 35 Issue 235SCHOLARLY PAPERand nursing profession display the classical case of a dominant profession (medicine) controlling a subordinate profession (nursing). The drive to maintain a dominant position continues to be the focus point of the nurse‑doctor relationship (Apesoa‑Varano et  al  2011; Fisher 2009; Hirschkorn 2006; Fisher 2005). However despitethis continuing need to impose themselves on other health professionals authors such as Copper et al (2008) and Kroezen et al (2013) have suggested that with the introduction of nurse prescribing the professional boundary between the medical and nursing professions need to be reassessed. Prescribing had been traditionally an indication of the clinical autonomy and professional power of the medical profession within the wider structure of society (Weiss et al 2006). With the introduction of the nurse prescriber the medical profession has attempted to limit the sharing of knowledge with other health professionals, as well as making the medical profession the sole arbiter of health care management. The dichotomy between the perception (of what the medical profession believes is the extent of their power) and the reality (of how this  power  has  been  eroded)  has  become  in  effect  what  Fagin  and  Garelick  (2004)  described  as  the  on‑going conflict around the doctor nurse working relationship. The medical profession has    in  response to  nurseprescribing shifted its self from its prescribing role to one of a diagnostician in an attempt to re‑ impose its dominance over other health professionals.  This action could be interpreted as the medical profession`s failure to accept that it is no‑longer in charge (Dent 2006, Willis 2006).  Health  care  is  now  viewed  as  a  partnership  between  health  professionals  (a  doctor  or  a  nurse)  and  the  patient. This change has also seen a shift in the relationship between health professionals. In part this is due to the blurring of roles between doctors and nurses. This has resulted in numerous authors suggesting that doctors should no longer be regarded as top of the health hierarchy nor thought of as indispensable to the delivery of  healthcare (Crow and    Smith 2003, Rosen and    Dewar 2004, Barr    and    Ross     2006). This    change in the professional relationship has also raised a question over power. Does the medical profession retain its power (over other health professionals still) or is this power now shared with the nurse prescriber. CONCLUSIONDespite overwhelming evidence of  the benefits of  nurse prescribing, the full   potential of  the role  has    yet   to  be attained. In part this is due to the continuing opposition of the medical profession to the idea of non‑medical prescribers. This disparity not only strengthens the idea that medical prescribers are superior, but fosters the idea that the medical profession retain power over all health professionals. This opposition continues to hold back further development of nurse prescribing. Nurses need to take ownership of non‑medical prescribing, by addressing the inequalities within the professional relationship. It is only by challenging this behaviour that will see nursing no‑longer viewed as subservient to the whims of the medical profession. This will not be an easy task, challenging any behaviour is not easy however as more and more doctors become exposed to the work of non‑medical prescribers, the concept of the nurse prescriber will no‑longer be seen as an inferior to the medical prescriber and true equal partnership will develop between the two professions. RECOMMENDATIONS• That nurse prescribers have the same educational opportunities as there medical counterparts’ e.g in‑house lectures, presentations from pharmaceutical companies.  • That nurse prescribers are given the opportunity to work with more experienced medical prescribers to develop not only their prescribing skill, but to foster a better understanding between the two professions.
AUSTRALIAN JOURNAL OF ADVANCED NURSING Volume 35 Issue 236SCHOLARLY PAPERREFERENCESAbbott, A. 1988. The system of professions: An essay on the division of expert labor. Chicago, The University of Chicago press.Adamson, B.J.,    Kenny, D.T.    and    Wilson‑Barnett, J.  1995. The impact of  perceived medical dominance on   the workplace satisfaction of Australian and British nurses. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 21(1):172‑183.Apesoa –  Varano, E.C.,    Barker, J.C.   and    Hinton, L.  2011. Curing and    caring: The work    of  primary care physicians with    dementia patients.Quality Health Research, 21(11):1469‑1483.Australian Medical Association. 2005. AMA rejects independent nurse practitioners as medical workforce solution. https://www.ama.com.au/position‑statement/independent‑nurse‑practitioners‑ (accessed 05/12/14).Avery, A.J. and Pringle, M. 2005. Extending prescribing by UK nurses and pharmacists. British Medical Journal, 331:1154‑1155.Barr,    H.  and Ross, F.  2006. Mainstreaming Interprofessional education in  the United Kingdom: a  position paper. Journal of Interprofessional Care, 20(2):96‑104.BBC.    2005. BBC    News channel. Nurse prescribing plans opposed. 10   November (on‑line) http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/health/4424112.stm. (accessed 05/11/2016).Bissell, P.,   Cooper, R.,   Preston, L.,   Anderson, C.,   Avery, A.,   James, V.,   Hutchinson, A.,   Lymn, J.,   Murphy, E.,   Ratcliffe, J.,   Ward, P.  and Woolsey,  I.  2008.  An  evaluation  of  supplementary  prescribing  in  nursing  and  pharmacy,  Final  report  for  the  Department  of  Health,  University of Sheffield.Bowskill, D., Timmons, S. and James, V. 2012. How do nurse prescribers integrate prescribing in practice: case studies in primary andsecondary care. Journal of clinical Nursing, 22(13‑14):2077‑2086. Bradley, E. and Nolan, P. 2007. Impact of nurse prescribing: A qualitative study. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 59(2):120‑128.Carey, N. and Courtenay, M. 2008. Nurse supplementary prescribing for patients’ with diabetes: a national questionnaire survey. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 17(16):2185‑2193.Carey, N.,   Stenner, K.  and    Courtenay, M.   2009. Adopting the prescribing role    in  practice: exploring nurses` views in  a  specialist children`shospital. Paediatric Nursing, 21(9):25‑29.Carey,  N.,  Stenner,  K.  and  Courtenay,  M.  2014.  An  exploration  of  how  nurse  prescribing  is  being  used  for  patients  with  respiratory  conditions across the east of England. BMC Health Service Research, 14:27. Caulfield, H. 2004. Legal aspects, responsibility, accountability in nurse prescribing. Prescribing Nurse, 20‑23.Cooper, R.,   Anderson, C.,   Avery, T.,   Bissell, P.,   Guillaume, L.,   Hutchinson, A.,   Lymm, J.,   Murphy, E.,   Ratcliffe, J.  and    Ward, P.  2008. Nurseand Pharmacist supplementary prescribing in the UK‑ A thematic review of the literature. Health Policy, 85(3):277‑292.Courtenay, M.,   Carey, N.   and    Burke, J.  2007. Independent extended and    Supplementary Nurse prescribing practice in  the UK:    A  nationalquestionnaire survey. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 44(7):1093‑1101.Courtenay,  M.  and  Carey,  N.  2008.  Nurse  Independent  Prescribing  and  Nurse  supplementary  prescribing  practice:  national  survey.  Journal of Advanced Nursing, 61(3):291‑299.Courtenay, M., Carey, N., Stenner, K.  Lawton S and Peters, J. 2011. Patients views of nurse prescribing: effects on care, concordance and medicine taking. British Journal of Dermatology, 164(2):391‑396.Creedon, R.,   Byrne, S.,   Kennedy, J.  and    McCarthy, S.   2015. The impact of   nurse prescribing on   the clinical setting. British Journal of Nursing, 24(17):878‑885.Crow, J. and Smith, L. 2003. Using co‑teaching as a means of facilitating Interprofessional collaboration in health and social care. Journal of Interprofessional Care, 17(1):45‑55.Day, M. 2005. (news item) UK doctors protest at extension to nurses` prescribing powers. British Medical Journal, 331:1159.Dent, M. 2006. Disciplining the medical profession? Implications of patient choice for medical dominance. Health Social Rev, 15(5):458‑468.Department of Health. 2000. The NHS plan: A plan for investment, a plan for reform, Crown copyright, London.Elsom, S.,   Happell, B.  and    Manias, E.  2009. Nurse practitioners and    medical practice: opposing forces or  complementary contributions?Perspectives in Psychiatric Care, 45(1):9‑16.Fagin, L. and Garelick, A. 2004. The doctor‑nurse relationship. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 10:277‑286.Fisher, S.E.    and    Vaughan‑Cole, B.   2003. Similarities and    differences in   client treated and    in   medications prescribed by   APRNs and psychiatrists in a CMHC. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 17(3):101‑107.Fisher,  R.  2005.  Relationships  in  nurse  prescribing  in  district  nursing  practice  in  England:  A  preliminary  investigation.  International Journal of Nursing Practice, 11(3):102‑107.Fisher, R. 2009. Relationships in nurse prescribing: revealing the processes. British Journal of Community Nursing, 14(12):518‑524.Foucault, M. 1995. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, Translated by A.Sheridan, Vintage Books, New York.Freidson, E. 1970. Profession of medicine: a study of the sociology of applied knowledge, New York, Dodd, Mead & Company.
