Ever wonder what it might feel like to be stalked by a tiger? New drone footage from China will give you a thrill, though the backstory might bring you back down.

Footage released by the Chinese state broadcaster CCTV shows Siberian tigers at the Siberian Tiger Park in Harbin, a city in northeast China, sprinting after an airborne drone in the February snow. According to CCTV, park officials use the drones to exercise the big cats and help them drop the pounds they pack on over the cold winter.A 2013 report by the EIA argues that rather than protecting wild populations, tiger farming stimulates the market for tiger products, which in turn encourages poaching, because it's cheaper to kill a tiger in the wild than it is to raise one in captivity.  

Conditions at tiger farms may not live up to high standards of animal husbandry. Numerous reports from people who visited the Harbin park tell of visitors buying live chickens and hunks of meat to throw to the tigers. In 2011, the driver of a tourist bus at the Harbin park was mauled to death by a tiger after leaving his vehicle when it got stuck during a tour, according to news reports. In 2016, a reporter from the South China Morning Post magazine visited Xiongsen and photographed emaciated tigers in featureless enclosures.

Housing tigers communally is probably stressful for them, said Brian Aucone, senior vice president for animal care and conservation at the Denver Zoo, which is in the process of opening a new tiger habitat. The enclosure in the video looks fine — for a single tiger, Aucone said. The drone chase may also be a source of stress, he said.

"It seems a bit teasing to them, from my perspective," he said. The end of the chase doesn't come with a food reward, he said. Instead, it's a potential health risk for the big cats.

"You've got battery material that they could easily bite into that's toxic, so the fact that they are able to get ahold of the drone is certainly concerning," Aucone told Live Science.

There are probably between 5,000 and 6,000 captive tigers in China, Banks said, and there are many living conditions that are worse than those found in the Harbin and Xiongsen parks, which tend to attract international criticism and media attention due to their size. Thailand, Laos and Vietnam are also home to "safari" parks linked to the illegal trade of tiger bones, Banks said.  

"Many, many of the tigers in captivity across China are seen in concrete enclosures," Banks said. "There is no habitat enrichment whatsoever."